block validity spec (#1205)
rollkit/rollkit: types/block_spec.md

# Block and Header Validity

## Abstract

Like all blockchains, rollups are defined as the chain of **valid** blocks from the genesis, to the head. Thus, the block and header validity rules define the chain.

Verifying a block / header is done in 3 parts:

1. Verify correct serialization according to the protobuf spec

2. Perform basic validation of the types

3. Perform verification of the new block against the previous accepted block

## Basic Validation

Each type contains a `.ValidateBasic()` method, which verifies that certain basic invariants hold. The `ValidateBasic()` calls are nested, starting from the `Block` struct, all the way down to each subfield.

The nested basic validation, and validation checks, are called as follows:

```go
Block.ValidateBasic()
  // Make sure the block's SignedHeader passes basic validation

>   SignedHeader.ValidateBasic()

Author: Verify requires an adjacent header, ValidateBasic can be called without one

    // Make sure the SignedHeader's Header passes basic validation
    Header.ValidateBasic()
	  verify ProposerAddress not nil
	// Make sure the SignedHeader's Commit passes basic validation
	Commit.ValidateBasic()
	  // Ensure that someone signed the block
	  verify len(c.Signatures) not 0

> 	If sh.Validators is nil, or len(sh.Validators.Validators) is 0, assume based rollup, pass validation, and skip all remaining checks.

Reviewer: Arent we making sure that someone signed the block in the check above? How come we can make sure someone signed the block but there are no validators at the same time.

Author: issue
https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1272

	Validators.ValidateBasic()
	  // github.com/rollkit/cometbft/blob/main/types/validator.go#L37

> 	  verify sh.Validators is not nil, and len(sh.Validators.Validators) != 0

Author: issue
https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1272

	  // apply basic validation to all Validators
	  for each validator:
	    validator.ValidateBasic()
		  validate not nil
		  validator.PubKey not nil
		  validator.VotingPower >= 0
		  validator.Address == correct size
	  // apply ValidateBasic to the proposer field:
	  sh.Validators.Proposer.ValidateBasic()
		validate not nil
		validator.PubKey not nil
		validator.VotingPower >= 0
		validator.Address == correct size
    Assert that SignedHeader.Validators.Hash() == SignedHeader.AggregatorsHash
    Assert that len(SignedHeader.Commit.Signatures) == 1 (Exactly one signer check)
	Verify the 1 signature

>   Data.ValidateBasic() // always passes

Reviewer: Whats the purpose of this check if we don't do anything with it? Should we add something to Data.ValidateBasic() ?

Author: Issue created
https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1271

  // make sure the SignedHeader's DataHash is equal to the hash of the actual data in the block.
  Data.Hash() == SignedHeader.DataHash
```

## Verification Against Previous Block

```go

> // (Block.Verify is currenty unimplemented)

Author: it doesn't match the spec

creating issue

> // (Block.Verify is currenty unimplemented)

Author: https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1277

Block.Verify()
  SignedHeader.Verify(untrustH *SignedHeader)
    // basic validation removed in #1231, because go-header already validates it
    //untrustH.ValidateBasic()
	Header.Verify(untrustH *SignedHeader)
	  if untrustH.Height == h.Height + 1, then apply the following check:
	    untrstH.AggregatorsHash[:], h.NextAggregatorsHash[:]
	if untrustH.Height > h.Height + 1:

> 	  soft verification failure	

Author: created issue
https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1270

|----------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| SignedHeader   | Header of the block, signed by proposer | (See SignedHeader)                 |
| Data           | Transaction data of the block           | Data.Hash == SignedHeader.DataHash |

## [SignedHeader](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/types/signed_header.go#L16)

| **Field Name** | **Valid State**                                                          | **Validation**                                                                              |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Header         | Valid header for the block                                               | `Header` passes `ValidateBasic()` and `Verify()`                                            |
| Commit         | 1 valid signature from the expected proposer                             | `Commit` passes `ValidateBasic()`, with additional checks in `SignedHeader.ValidateBasic()` |

> | Validators     | Array of Aggregators, should be length 1 (or zero for based rollup case) | `Validators` passes `ValidateBasic()`                                                       |

Reviewer 2: should be at least length 1? Otherwise why is it an array.

Author: issue created
https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/issues/1273

## [Header](https://github.com/rollkit/rollkit/blob/main/types/header.go#L25)

| **Field Name**      | **Valid State**                                                                            | **Validation**                        |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| **BaseHeader** .    |                                                                                            |                                       |
| Height              | Height of the previous accepted header, plus 1.                                            | checked in the `Verify()`` step          |
| Time                | Timestamp of the block                                                                     | Not validated in Rollkit              |

> | ChainID             | The hard-coded ChainID of the chain                                                        | Should be checked as soon as possible |

Author: just mean it should be checked as soon as the header is received, it's the first field which determines whether or not the header is junk.

> | ChainID             | The hard-coded ChainID of the chain                                                        | Should be checked as soon as possible |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ChainID             | The hard-coded ChainID of the chain                                                        | Should be checked as soon as the header is received |
```

# Block and Header Validity

## Abstract

Like all blockchains, rollups are defined as the chain of **valid** blocks from the genesis, to the head. Thus, the block and header validation rules define the chain.

Verifying a block / header is done in 3 parts:

1. Verify correct serialization according to the protobuf spec

2. Perform basic validation of the types

3. Perform verification of the new block against the previous accepted block

## Basic Validation

Each type contains a `.ValidateBasic()` method, which verifies that certain basic invariants hold. The `ValidateBasic()` calls are nested, starting from the `Block` struct, all the way down to each subfield.

The nested basic validation is called like:

```go
Block.ValidateBasic()
  SignedHeader.ValidateBasic()
    Header.ValidateBasic()

> 	  ProposerAddress not nil

Author: unless we allow the ABCI app to change the sequencer address, then it's possible to check the sequencer address at this step, and improve performance.

Author: do we definitely want to allow the ABCI app to change the sequencer address? @nashqueue
